.TH MOPS 1 "April 2026" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mops \- Multipurpose Operations CLI for DevOps and MLOps
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mops
\fI<command>\fR [\fI<subcommand>\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mops
is a centralized utility designed for Linux system monitoring, hardware metrics, containerized environment tracking, and background task management. It bridges the gap between hardware monitoring and heavy compute workloads, making it an ideal fast-triage tool for MLOps and infrastructure engineers.
.SH COMMAND MODULES
.B mops
is divided into several subcommands. Use \fBmops <command> \-\-help\fR for module-specific documentation.
.SS disk \- Disk Operations
Manages and visualizes disk IO, usage, and mount points.
.TP
.B status
Show disk read/write statistics from /proc/diskstats.
.TP
.B usage
Show total, used, and free space on the root filesystem using statvfs.
.TP
.B mounts
Display currently mounted drives parsed from /proc/mounts.
.PP
\fBOptions for disk:\fR
.br
  \fB\-h\fR        Human-readable output (MB instead of raw sectors)
.br
  \fB\-l\fR        Long format (include extra information columns)

.SS sys \- System & Hardware Metrics
Monitors CPU, GPU, TPU, and container limits.
.TP
.B cpu
Show CPU utilization parsed from /proc/stat.
.TP
.B gpu
Show GPU utilization. Interfaces with nvidia-smi for VRAM, power, and temperature.
.TP
.B tpu
Show TPU availability by scanning /dev/accel*.
.TP
.B oom
List Out-Of-Memory killed processes from the kernel dmesg ring buffer.
.TP
.B cgroup
Show Cgroup / Docker container resource limits and actual memory usage.
.PP
\fBOptions for sys:\fR
.br
  \fB\-h\fR        Human-readable output
.br
  \fB\-l\fR        Long format (include extra information columns)
.br
  \fB\-\-pids\fR    Map active processes to GPU allocations (for the 'gpu' command)

.SS net \- Network Operations
.TP
.B port \fI<number>\fR
Finds the exact process ID (PID) and command line associated with a local TCP port by cross-referencing /proc/net/tcp and /proc/[pid]/fd socket inodes.

.SS task \- Task Management
Tracks and manages asynchronous or queued tasks using a local SQLite database. (Note: Only available when compiled with DEV_MODE).
.TP
.B exec \fI"<cmd>"\fR [\fB\-\-notify\fR \fI<url>\fR]
Execute a command synchronously.
.TP
.B bg \fI"<cmd>"\fR [\fB\-\-notify\fR \fI<url>\fR]
Start a background task, daemonize it (setsid), redirect output, and track its PID.
.TP
.B queue \fI"<cmd>"\fR | \fB\-\-exec\fR
Add a command to the queue, or use \-\-exec to consume and execute all queued tasks sequentially.
.TP
.B list
List all tracked tasks and their status. Automatically checks the OS process table to verify if running tasks are still alive.
.TP
.B logs \fI<id>\fR [\fB\-\-tail\fR]
Read or tail stdout/stderr for a tracked background task.
.TP
.B clean [\fB\-\-force\fR]
Sweep zombie processes and orphaned workers from the process tree. Use \-\-force to aggressively send SIGKILL to orphaned python/worker nodes attached to init.
.TP
.B kill \fI<id>\fR
Send SIGTERM to a running task.

.SS gcp \- Google Cloud Platform Utilities
Provides fast, dependency-free interactions with the GCP Metadata Server and wrappers for complex gcloud commands.
.TP
.B whoami
Instantly print the active Service Account email, Project ID, Zone, and attached Network Tags of the current VM using the local Metadata Server.
.TP
.B spot-watch \fB\-\-exec\fR \fI"<cmd>"\fR
Poll the GCP preempted endpoint. If a shutdown signal is detected, instantly execute the provided command (e.g., to save checkpoints).
.TP
.B tunnel \fI<instance>\fR \fI<remote-port>\fR:\fI<local-port>\fR
Establish an IAP tunnel to a private GCP instance, automatically constructing the underlying gcloud compute ssh command.
.TP
.B run-with-secrets \fI"<cmd>"\fR
Dynamically fetch secrets from GCP Secret Manager and inject them as environment variables into the provided command without writing them to disk.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B mops.db
SQLite database file created in the current working directory to track background task states.
.TP
.B /tmp/mops_task_<id>.log
Standard output and standard error log files for daemonized background tasks.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Check actual memory usage and limits inside a Docker container:
.B mops sys cgroup
.TP
Find out which exact process is hogging port 8080:
.B mops net port 8080
.TP
See exactly which background scripts are eating GPU VRAM:
.B mops sys gpu \-h \-\-pids
.TP
Start a long-running batch job and tail its logs:
.B mops task bg "python train.py"
.br
.B mops task logs 1 \-\-tail
.TP
Clean up orphaned multiprocessing workers that failed to exit gracefully:
.B mops task clean \-\-force
.TP
Forward local port 8080 to a remote TensorBoard instance over IAP:
.B mops gcp tunnel worker-gpu-1 6006:8080

.SH AUTHOR
Chaipat J. (GitHub: AppleBoiy, Email: contact@chaipat.cc)
